[INFERENCE PROVIDERS] guide on structured output (#1824)
huggingface/hub-docs: docs/inference-providers/guides/structured-output.md

# Structured Outputs with Inference Providers

> In this guide, we'll show you how to use Inference Providers to generate structured outputs that follow a specific JSON schema. This is incredibly useful for building reliable AI applications that need predictable, parseable responses.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this guide, we'll show you how to use Inference Providers to generate structured outputs that follow a specific JSON schema. This is incredibly useful for building reliable AI applications that need predictable, parsable responses.
```

> Instead of hoping the model returns properly formatted JSON, structured outputs guarantee that the response will match your exact schema every time. This eliminates the need for complex parsing logic and makes your applications more robust.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Structured outputs guarantee a model returns a response that matches your exact schema every time. This eliminates the need for complex parsing logic and makes your applications more robust.
```

<Tip>

This guide assumes you have a Hugging Face account. If you don't have one, you can create one for free at [huggingface.co](https://huggingface.co).

</Tip>

## What Are Structured Outputs?

> Structured outputs make sure that AI model responses always follow a specific structure, typically a JSON Schema. This means you get predictable, type-safe data that integrates easily with your systems. Instead of hoping the model returns valid JSON, you give the AI a strict template to follow, so you always get data in the format you expect.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Structured outputs make sure model responses always follow a specific structure, typically a JSON Schema. This means you get predictable, type-safe data that integrates easily with your systems. The model follows a strict template so you always get the data in the format you expect.
```

With structured outputs, you get:

- Guaranteed compliance with your defined schema
- Fewer errors from malformed or unparsable JSON
- Easier integration with downstream systems
- No need for retry logic or complex error handling
- More efficient use of tokens (less verbose instructions)

In short, structured outputs make your applications more robust and reliable by ensuring every response matches your schema, with built-in validation and type safety.

## Step 1: Define Your Schema

Before making any API calls, you need to define the structure you want. Let's build a practical example: extracting structured information from research papers. This is a common real-world use case where you need to parse academic papers and extract key details like title, authors, contributions, and methodology.

We'll create a simple schema that captures the most essential elements: the paper's title and a summary of its abstract. The easiest way to do this is to use Pydantic, a library that allows you to define Python classes that represent JSON schemas (among other things).

> <hfoptions id="json-pydantic">

Reviewer: I wouldn't use the toggles here since it sets up as a kind of "choose one or the other".  After showing the Pydantic code example, maybe transition with:

"The Pydantic represented JSON schema is shown below."

```

</hfoption>

<hfoption id="json">

```json
{
  "type": "object",
  "properties": {
    "title": {"type": "string"},
    "abstract_summary": {"type": "string"}
  },
  "required": ["title", "abstract_summary"]
}
```

</hfoption>

</hfoptions>

If you switch to the JSON option, you can see that the schema is exactly the same as the Pydantic model. This is what the LLM will receive as a response format instruction.

This simple schema ensures we'll always get the paper's title and a concise summary of its abstract. Notice how we mark both fields as required - this guarantees they'll always be present in the response, making our application more reliable.

## Step 2: Set up your inference client

Now that we have our schema defined, let's set up the client to communicate with the inference providers. We'll show you two approaches: the Hugging Face Hub client (which gives you direct access to all Inference Providers) and the OpenAI client (which works through OpenAI-compatible endpoints).

<hfoptions id="structured-outputs-implementation">

<hfoption id="huggingface_hub">

Install the Hugging Face Hub python package:

```bash
pip install huggingface_hub
```

> Here's how to initialize the Hugging Face Hub client with the `InferenceClient` class.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Initialize the `InferenceClient` with an Inference Provider (check this [list](https://huggingface.co/docs/inference-providers/index#partners) for all available providers) and your Hugging Face token.
```

```python
import os
from huggingface_hub import InferenceClient

# Initialize the client
client = InferenceClient(
    provider="cerebras",  # or use "auto" for automatic selection
    api_key=os.environ["HF_TOKEN"],
)

```

</hfoption>

<hfoption id="openai">

Install the OpenAI python package:

```bash
pip install openai
```

> Here's how to initialize the OpenAI client with the `OpenAI` class.

Reviewer: Where do you find the `base_url`?

```suggestion
Initialize an `OpenAI` client with the `base_url` and your Hugging Face token.
```

```python
import os
from openai import OpenAI
from pydantic import BaseModel
from typing import List

# Initialize the OpenAI client (works with Inference Providers)
client = OpenAI(
    base_url="https://router.huggingface.co/cerebras/v1",
    api_key=os.environ["HF_TOKEN"]
)

```

</hfoption>

</hfoptions>

<Tip>

> Structured outputs are good use case for selecting a specific provider and model because you want to avoid incompatibility issues between the model, provider and the schema.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Structured outputs are a good use case for selecting a specific provider and model because you want to avoid incompatibility issues between the model, provider and the schema.
```

    model="Qwen/Qwen3-32B",
)

# The response is guaranteed to match your schema
structured_data = response.choices[0].message.content
print(structured_data)
```

</hfoption>

<hfoption id="openai">

Here's how to generate structured outputs with the OpenAI client:

```python
# Example paper text (truncated for brevity)
paper_text = """
Title: Attention Is All You Need

Abstract: The dominant sequence transduction models are based on complex recurrent 
or convolutional neural networks that include an encoder and a decoder...
"""

# Generate structured output using Qwen/Qwen3-32B model
# With the OpenAI client, you can use the `response_format` as a pydantic model
completion = client.beta.chat.completions.parse(
    model="qwen-3-32b",
    messages=[
        {"role": "system", "content": "Extract paper title and abstract summary."},
        {"role": "user", "content": paper_text}
    ],
    response_format=PaperAnalysis
)

```

</hfoption>

</hfoptions>

## Step 4: Handle the Response

Both approaches guarantee that your response will match the specified schema. Here's how to access and use the structured data:

<hfoptions id="structured-outputs-implementation">

> The Hugging Face Hub client returns a `ChatCompletion` object, which contains the response from the model as a string. You can then parse the response to get the structured data using the `json.loads` function.

Reviewer: I'd nest this under the `<hfoption id="huggingface_hub>`

```suggestion
The Hugging Face Hub client returns a `ChatCompletion` object, which contains the response from the model as a string. Use the `json.loads` function to parse the response and get the structured data.
```

<hfoption id="huggingface_hub">

```python
# The response is guaranteed to match your schema
structured_data = response.choices[0].message.content
print("Paper Analysis Results:")
print(structured_data)

# Parse the JSON to work with individual fields
import json
analysis = json.loads(structured_data)
print(f"Title: {analysis['title']}"
print(f"Abstract Summary: {analysis['abstract_summary']}")
```

</hfoption>

> The OpenAI client returns a `ChatCompletion` object, which contains the response from the model as a Python object. You can then access the structured data using the `title` and `abstract_summary` attributes of the `PaperAnalysis` class.

Reviewer: This should go under the `<hfoption id="openai">` toggle

> The OpenAI client returns a `ChatCompletion` object, which contains the response from the model as a Python object. You can then access the structured data using the `title` and `abstract_summary` attributes of the `PaperAnalysis` class.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The OpenAI client returns a `ChatCompletion` object, which contains the response from the model as a Python object. Access the structured data using the `title` and `abstract_summary` attributes of the `PaperAnalysis` class.
```

    in sequence modeling and transduction problems such as language modeling and machine translation.
    """
    
    # Define the response format (JSON Schema)
    # Generate structured output
    messages = [
        {
            "role": "system",
            "content": "Extract paper title and abstract summary.",
        },
        {
            "role": "user",
            "content": paper_text,
        },
    ]
    
    completion = client.beta.chat.completions.parse(
        model="qwen-3-32b",
        messages=messages,
        response_format=PaperAnalysis,
    )
    
    # Get the parsed response as a Python object
    analysis = completion.choices[0].message.parsed
    
    print(f"Title: {analysis.title}")
    print(f"Abstract Summary: {analysis.abstract_summary}")
```

</hfoption>

</hfoptions>

</details>

## Next Steps

Now that you understand structured outputs, you probably want to build an application that uses them. Here are some ideas for fun things you can try out:

- **Different models**: Experiment with different models. The biggest models are not always the best for structured outputs!

> - **Multi-turn conversations**: Maintaining structured format across conversation turns
> - **Complex schemas**: Building domain-specific schemas for your use case

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Multi-turn conversations**: Maintaining structured format across conversation turns.
- **Complex schemas**: Building domain-specific schemas for your use case.
```
